that unless A&M terminated its
policy, which refused admission to women,
terminated racial segregation, and made the
Corps optional, that we did not believe it would
grow.
I particularly called his, attempted to
particularly call his attention to our, one of our
committee studies, that if we remained,
if none of those changes were made,
that we believe the enrollment
of the Indium College of Texas on its 100th
anniversary would be only a few hundred larger
than it was in the early 60s, slightly more than
7,000.
And that in the table of variable growth
patterns, the highest would be
for the admission of women into racial
segregation and making the Corps of Cadets
optional, which seemed to lead to about 16,000 in
1976.
Of course, hindsight now tells us
that the number crunchers were incorrect by about
a third for the enrollment in the mid-70s reached
24,000 or so.
In that unforgettable conversation with Dean
Hall, I attempted to say that I could not in good
faith make many of the changes President Rutter
had requested because he was disagreeing not with
our objective findings, but our subjective, and
that the committee really believed
was in true agreement on its recommendations.
Quietly, he looked me in the eye and responded,
quote, I will stake my job on your responsibility,
on your ability
to reflect
what the committee really recommends.
I then rewrote
I did recast the report in a few instances to
correct some wording
some to polish some of the wording but made no
changes of any importance
I kept draft
copy with Mr. Rudder's comments for a few weeks and
then one Sunday morning as we were ready to head as
our
we were in the car to head to Sunday school the phone
rang and I went inside to answer it and heard the
voice of Doris McQuarrie, President Rutter's
trusted assistant.
He was inquiring about the report which Vice
President Hull had told, the report which Mr.
Rutter had annotated, which Vice President Hull
had told the President that I still retain.
I told Mr. McCrory, Colonel McCrory, that report
was accurate and that I could get it back to him,
quote, in a few days. He promptly responded that he
would meet me at the Nagel Hall parking lot in five
minutes and I was to hand it to him.
Thus, I did not have an opportunity to make a copy of
those historic comments, which I now wish was
available for all of us to study because it would
demonstrate how much progress
we have made.
Paragraph.
A few weeks later, a
report, we heard that President Rutter, that soon
after reading the final version of the
Aspirations report, That president rudder
summoned the four Deans.
And vice president hauled to his office. This
group included. Dr Al Price. The Dean of
Veterinary Medicine.
Identified by. students and faculty a slick owl
because when the Dean of Veterinary Medicine
finished a project, it was always polished, well
done, and the smooth and smooth at all of its
services. A skillful effort.
Frank Hubert, the Dean of the School of Arts and
Sciences
was a man who would not back away from his
principles.
He was highly respected throughout the state
and
blessed with a strong backbone. Gus Watkins, Dean
of Agriculture,
a man of keen insight and quiet determination,
was respected for his integrity.
And Fred Benson, the dean of engineering,
was known to one and all
as a leader who could get to the point of any matter
without delay.
According to the report, President Rutter seated
the five
administrators opposite his desk and then began
to lecture them
strongly about
the danger of these recommendations quote
getting out of control
that they might that these dreams might have gone
beyond reality and might stir up
arguments that would endanger the entire
institution
he also reminded his staff that they were supposed
to have
kept him informed and kept and quote kept things in
line period
quote when he asked but then he turned to each of the
individuals and asked them for their personal
opinion of how these matters had come to fruition.
Three of the five later stated in my presence that
they had attempted to make excuses, pointed in the
other direction, had tried to dodge, duck, and
avoid the blame. Their version indicated that the
first four respondents
had spoken the same message.
And then President Rutter got to the remaining
member of the quintet. And ask his opinion.
But calm response.
was something to the effect
that, quote, Earl, you asked
these people to study these matters for a number of
months and to give you their recommendations.
If you didn't want to hear those recommendations,
Maybe you shouldn't have asked for him in the first
place.
Then that advisor.
Picked up his hat and walked out of the conference
room. To the surprise. Of all of the remaining of
his colleagues and the meeting adjourned. In less
than a half hour, President Rutter called the Dean
of Engineering and said, thank you, Fred. I needed
that message. I'm grateful for your candor.
Another important event occurred at about that
time, many miles away.
Ed Cooper, who succeeded Dorsey McCrory as
assistant to President Rutter and later served in
a similar capacity for President Jack Williams,
and then
was the remarkably successful dean of admissions
and records,
said that
an old friend,
and as I'm saying this, I'm passing not far from the
LBJ Ranch, Don't put that in the typescript, or at
least we won't put it in the final version.
Cooper thought that one of the important steps and
this remarkably important transformation of A&M
occurred, quote, at a bed and breakfast, perhaps
in the wee hours of the morning, after two old
friends had shared
a cool beverage.
Period quote. This interpretation,
this conversation
occurred between the Vice President and soon to be
between the President of the United States
and the former mayor of Brady, Texas.
Because. In the historic 1948.
Senate campaign.
Earl Rudder, then the mayor of Brady. Had served as
the campaign chairman.
For LBJ. In the Hill Country counties.
Mrs. Rudder recalled that the then
representative from the Hill Country had come to
their front room in Brady and asked her husband to
coordinate the Johnson campaign in the Hill
Country. Quote, although I know you probably
can't carry McCulloch County since my opponent,
Coach Stevenson,
is from Junction in Kimball County. But do the best
you can, Earl. Period. Quote.
Rudders, skillful leadership. produced 183 vote
majority in Kimball County.
And later it was a that margin was a matter of
teasing and smiles when the president, the United
States would remind the A and M chief executive
officer
Quote quote Earl. Without your success in the Hill
Country. We wouldn't have had that 87 vote
landslide statewide.
But in the Cooper recollection. Apparently,
according to the Cooper recollection.
Apparently, Lyndon Johnson. told Mr. Rutter that
he had to get, quote, had to get A&M moving because
it wasn't growing, was standing still, and the
other schools are passing A&M by, period, quote.
So if A&M expected to be able, quote, to get money
from the federal government quote, it was going to
have to grow in size and quality.
The president also noted that the courts had
already, the federal courts had already decided
the matter of
racial integration. And thus A&M had no choice on
that matter.
And apparently, he wondered how long it might be
before the courts could possibly reach a similar
decision regarding the exclusion of women.
Apparently, the tall Texan told his old hill
country friend, I'll back you. and reminded him
that new governor John Connolly and his wife
Nellie had been close friends, close
undergraduate friends during their years
with Margaret Rutter during the years that the
three of them shared at the University of Texas.
Also, apparently, There was mention that
Sterling Evans, chairman of the NM Board of
Directors, was an old land entrepreneur friend of
LBJ's, and he was known to be a supporter of
coeducation.
An added advantage was that Rutter and
Congressman Jake Pickle who had represented the
Austin area in Congress for many years, had been
acquainted since their junior high days.
Perhaps unknown to LBJ was the fact that Bill
Moore, the state senator from Brazos County,
known as the Bull of the Brazos because of his
determined manner of leadership
in the State Affairs Committee of the upper house
in the legislature, was also a
determined advocate of coeducation and
voluntary status for the court.
Senator Moore
quietly determined in terms of his
conversational style
to masses,
but doggedly
energetic
in his Senate Manor
thought that A&M needed to change, particularly
regarding women, possibly because he had a
daughter who might be an Aggie if females could
enroll there.
Perhaps it is now safe
for the author of these remarks to admit
a leak in the privacy
of the RISL recommendations near the termination
of that committee's efforts.
Blue Book Benton,
a cherished departmental colleague
in government
and a always devoted
yellow dog democrat
came to me one day and asked if the committee had
made a final decision regarding its
recommendations.
I indicated that was correct, but that we could not
publicly, but that those conclusions were to be
kept private. Then with a smile he asked if I might
be willing
to share those recommendations with a quote
stranger
who
was, who enjoyed a quote key place
in the Texas Senate.
I tried to respond to his inquiry
with unspoken approval
and he then described
how a stranger might knock on my dark office door
early in the evening
a few days a few nights later
with a certain
sequence
and that then I could invite that visitor to enter.
If the light was off, then in all truth, neither
party would have, quote, any idea who the other
person was.
When that evening came.
I heard the knock. Invited the stranger in.
And in the darkness it did seem like. That this.
Unknown person. Or some resemblance.
To my. to the pictures of the state senator that I
had seen.
Within a few minutes,
I indicated the committee's recommendations in
favor of women, racial integration, voluntary
membership in the Corps of Cadets, and higher
admissions at A&M. He thanked me and left.
Meanwhile, other steps were underway to help
ensure that the recommended changes would become
fact.
Since it was the election year of 1964,
Jack Creighton, C-R-I-C-H-T-O-N,
the president of the Association of Former
Students, announced his candidacy for the
Republican nomination
as the Republican nominee for governor. That
meant that he would have to resign his service, his
position with the FSA. And John Lindsay, the
president-elect from Houston, move up to serve in
that capacity.
Lindsay, like Dick Hervey, the soon-to-retire
director of the FSA, of the former students, and
Buck Wirus, the incoming director, all favored
these changes.
These events came to a peak
when the A&M Board of Directors convene at the MSC
to vote their opinion, their recommendations, to
vote their decision regarding these matters.
The day before their paragraph,
the day before their session,
some of us heard that what we thought was a very
senior A&M graduate from the class of either 1898
or 99 was planning to get a group of students to go
with him to speak in opposition to the changes.
He invited
students to join him in a discussion at the head of
the stairs in the MSC.
Ray Stevens, a new colleague in Texas history, and
I thought if we took off our coats and ties, we might
walk over there and be mistaken for students.
Little did we realize that no such
misidentification would occur.
But we listened in amusement as this gentleman
lectured the students about how A&M